It was about time, we've been with 2.3.5 for too long. This update deprecates
some old stuff and doing so preps you for the imminent 3.0 release.

Read a detailed overview of all the bug fixes and other improvements on the
[Riding Rails][1] official blog.

One of the more welcome additions affects us developers of multilingual apps
or apps that don't have english as their default. Before you had to manually
call upon `human_attribute_name`, that used I18n when using the `label` or
`label_tag` helpers. Now it's done automatically.

    - form_for @inquiry do |f| %fieldset %legend Vprašalnik # Before: .question=
      f.label :industry, Inquiry.human_attribute_name(:industry) # After: .question=
      f.label :industry

A major boost for readability and productivity. In order for this to work, you
must have the following translations setup like this (i'm using the Slovenian
locale) in `config/locales`:

    sl: activerecord: attributes: inquiry: industry: "Industrija"

Among other things, the fucking omnipresent deprecation message has now been
silenced. Thank you!

A day after the much awaited 2.3.6 release they found some bugs in the
HTML-safety features. [2.3.7 was needed][2].

**Update** May 25th, 2010

[2.3.8][3] is out. Apparently two releases in two days weren't enough :-)
Well, they were in a hurry and the 2.3.7 release unfortunately forced everyone
to use rails_xss escaping of strings by default.


[1]: http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2010/5/23/ruby-on-rails-2-3-6-released   "Rails 2.3.6 release on Riding Rails"
[2]: http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2010/5/24/ruby-on-rails-2-3-7-released   "Rails 2.3.7 release on Riding Rails"
[3]: http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2010/5/25/ruby-on-rails-2-3-8-released   "Rails 2.3.8 release on Riding Rails"